this video was made possible by Tam for
a cause raise money for charity just by
opening new tabs which we're going to do
anyway
the coronavirus is wrecking havoc on the
world gone is the basketball season the
Summer Olympics and unfortunately
baseball but at least the Nationals will
remain World Series champions for
another year so many things are getting
canceled that people are wondering what
else could possibly be canceled before
this thing is over particularly people
are worried about the upcoming
presidential election once considered
completely unthinkable people are now
legitimately asking this question
especially since this has already
impacted the political process already
several Democratic primaries have been
postponed even within hours of their
scheduled primary date for example Ohio
Governor Mike DeWine
actually asked the state supreme court
to postpone their primary election when
the Ohio Supreme Court denied his
request he simply ordered the polls
closed effectively circumventing the
courts decision this is not about
politics this is about protecting Ohio
citizens lives so if it's possible to
postpone a primary election can the
general election be postponed as well
it's natural to wonder if President
Trump already has a legally plausible
plan up his sleeve to just cancel the
election entirely and start a second
term in office unlighted
so can the president actually cancel the
general election this November the
answer will surprise you
[Music]
hey legal eagles it's time to think like
a lawyer because our democracy is at
stake or is it there's certainly a lot
of uncertainty about the November
election and that was even before the
current pandemic will we be standing in
line to vote with masks and gloves or
will we be able to mail in our vote or
will president Trump just take over and
become the dear leader for life as all
true Americans want him to well today
we're going to discuss whether or not
the president can actually cancel the
general election and all of the wacky
legal implications that this has full
disclosure some of the issues and the
analysis in this episode come from the
podcast opening arguments opening
arguments is a great podcast run by
attorney Andrew Torres and Thomas Smith
Andrew took a deep dive into this
subject in response to a thought
experiment by a Vox journalist Ian
millhowser I'll drop a link to the
opening arguments podcast in the
doobly-doo definitely check it out it's
really great so the question is can
Trump cancel the general election well
look I'm not going to bury the lead and
make you sweat through this entire video
to get to the answer the bottom line is
the President cannot legally cancel the
election it probably won't happen now
could he try well sure anyone can try
anything just like anyone can sue
another person over anything but it
doesn't mean that they're going to be
successful but no matter what way you
slice it even with president Trump's
ever expansive view of his Article two
presidential powers then I have an
article to where I have the right to do
whatever I want as president but I don't
even talk about that even he can't take
steps that would effectively more of his
presidency into a dictatorship that's
because the Constitution itself places
specific parameters on presidential
terms including the length of a
president's term as well as the specific
date and time as to when that term ends
but that's just the beginning of the
insanity of what would happen if the
election were in fact cancelled and in
this context I'm using the word
cancelled to mean the president actually
puts troops and prevents people from
actually going to the polls because he
can't legally cancel the election so
we're talking about some really drastic
moves here now that being said the
Constitution states the president shall
hold his office during the term of four
years and even more specifically it
states in the twenty
amendment that his term shall end at
noon on the 20th day of January very
specific not much wiggle room
furthermore the president is elected by
each of the state's electors under
article 2 of the Constitution and
Congress determines the time of choosing
of the electors and the day on which
they shall give their votes remember the
president is elected not by a popular
vote but by the electoral college and
you'll see later in this video
even if President Trump opts out to
become a squatter in the White House
legally the presidency would pass to
somebody else effective on the 20th of
January 2021 now I can already hear you
saying in the comments great thanks for
the quick constitutional law lesson but
regardless of what the Constitution says
could the president still find some
shady way to use the coronavirus to his
advantage to postpone or possibly cancel
the November election for instance can
the president declared martial law due
to the pandemic and legally circumvent
the Constitution well the answer to this
and any other similar question is mostly
no more specifically when it comes to
the Constitution there's no known
circumstance that can suspend the
enforcement of the Constitution not a
pandemic not a natural disaster not a
war and not even a war fought between
citizens of the same country
specifically the Civil War and believe
me it was tried and that was the case in
the famous constitutional law case of ex
parte Milligan which is the seminal case
for simply saying that the Constitution
is the Constitution and no matter the
circumstances the Constitution applies
ex parte Milligan was born out of the
events surrounding the Civil War like a
pandemic a civil war is an unprecedented
event and President Lincoln suspended
the writ of habeas corpus which was an
unconstitutional event so the first
question is in this context what is a
writ of habeas corpus a writ of habeas
corpus as you've probably seen in movies
is a federal tool used to bring a
prisoner before the court to determine
if their imprisonment or detention is
lawful the drafters of the Constitution
actually considered a writ of habeas
corpus to be so important that they
included the concept of petitioning the
court for a release of a prisoner who's
unlawfully detained in the first article
of the actual US Constitution not in the
bill of rights not in the amendments but
in the action
Constitution itself now article 1 states
that the privileges of the writ of
habeas corpus shall not be suspended
unless when in cases of rebellion of
invasion that public safety may require
it President Lincoln suspended the writ
of habeas corpus at the same time that
he declared martial law martial law is
basically the law administered by
military forces that is invoked by a
government in an emergency when the
civilian law enforcement agencies are
unable to maintain public order and
safety and by the way it's martial law
spelled ma RTI al not Marshall spelled
ma are SH ALL this is not some guy named
Marshall it's Marshall as in war warlike
law it's just a pet peeve of mine that I
see people spelling all the time on
social media anyway notwithstanding the
facts of ex parte Milligan involved a
racist lawyer by the name of Landon P
Milligan who was charged with conspiracy
against the United States aiding and
abetting the Confederacy and inciting
instance now when Lincoln suspended the
writ of habeas corpus and declared
martial law the government tried to
circumvent the courts and said that
Milligan could be legally tried in a
military tribunal instead of through the
civilian court system where he was
quickly convicted and sentenced to hang
but before Milligan could be hanged he
sued to stay the execution and the
Supreme Court agreed with him saying
that you can't suspend habeas corpus
there's a frame Court held that it was
unconstitutional to try civilians by a
military tribunal unless there were no
civilian courts available which wasn't
the case in support of the Supreme
Court's holding the court noted and
here's the important part that citizens
have certain rights by the Constitution
such as the trial by jury and that this
constitutional guarantee was quote
intended for a state of war as well as a
state of peace and as equally binding
upon rulers and people at all times and
under all circumstances bottom line if
Lincoln couldn't get around the
Constitution while Americans were
literally at war with each other
then President Trump doesn't stand a
chance of being able to step outside the
confines of the Constitution due to the
corona virus pandemic but could
President Trump tried to reschedule or
postpone indefinitely the election well
as president Trump is finding out the
hard way regarding emergency power
a lot of election power resides with the
states article 1 states that the times
places in manner of holding elections
for Senators and Representatives shall
be prescribed in each state by the
legislature thereof but that Congress
may at any time by law make or alter
such regulations except as to the places
of choosing of senators so election law
is really up to the states with a little
bit of oversight from Congress in the
Constitution federal laws have long been
on the books that dictate when the
president vice president members of
Congress are elected you can look to 3
USC 1 which states that quote the
electors of president and vice president
shall be appointed in each state on the
Tuesday after the first Monday in
November in every fourth year succeeding
every election of a president and vice
president similar laws set the date
senators and congresspeople start their
term the third day of January these laws
are incredibly specific and nothing in
them provides any exception for the
president to move these dates around and
since we have federal statutes in place
people should have solace the president
cannot simply reschedule the election as
Democratic presidential candidate Joe
Biden put we voted in the middle of the
Civil War we voted in the middle of
World War one and to and so the idea of
postponing the electoral process is just
it seems to me out of the question
this is about making sure they were able
to conduct our democracy while we're
dealing with a pandemic so now we've
established the Constitution and federal
statutes are specific about when the
elections take place and when the
president's term ends both the
Constitution and federal statutes can
only be changed by a subsequent act of
Congress to amend them and the president
can't take any unilateral action to
supersede them independently but
president Trump has repeatedly stated
his belief that article 2 gives him
absolute power it's a thing called
article 2 nobody ever mentions article 2
it gives me all of these rights and a
level that nobody has ever seen before
we don't even talk about article 2 so
what if in the coming months president
Trump thinks that he might lose the
general election what could President
Trump do well there are basically two
things that President Trump could
attempt to do to remain in office he
could try to convince the states to take
away their citizen's right to vote for
president or he could try to use the
military to physically prevent people
from voting the first scenario is much
more plausible though
still very very unlikely because the 50
states hold considerable power in
determining the rules for elections
including federal elections then that
happens to take place within their
borders the states can control the
method of voting that will be used
whether or not a felon can vote for
example and what if any identification
voters must show at the polls though of
course there are some constitutional
limitations to those kind of
restrictions namely from the Fifteenth
Amendment and the Voting Rights Act
which deal with ensuring that citizens
aren't prevented from voting due to
discriminatory or arbitrary means but
other than that the elections are mostly
under the control of the states and if
forced potentially states could find
alternative ways to hold congressional
or presidential elections with each
state's secretively rescheduling them
outside of the designated federal
election day and or conceivably if
people are physically prevented from
going to the polls no matter what then
conceivably the state legislatures could
take back the power of their electors in
the electoral college and vote in the
electoral college the way that they
think that their state population would
vote in the general election which of
course would be incredibly ironic
because it would actually be a good use
for the Electoral College which under
normal circumstances there are simply no
good defenses for the Electoral College
in this day and age to thwart the
popular vote to thumbs down and anyone
who tries to defend the electoral
college is simply wrong and/or dumb but
I digress
so even if the president successfully
albeit illegally thwarts the election
and electors never cast their vote or
their votes are never counted there are
constitutional provisions already in
place that we discuss that would prevent
his term from naturally extending so if
the election doesn't go forward then
president Trump doesn't just get to
remain in office to find out what would
happen we just have to go back to our
conversation at the beginning of this
video which if you'll recall is the fact
that the President shall hold his office
during the term of four years and
specifically the twentieth amendment
which provides for an end date of that
term which provides at the president's
term shall expire on noon on the 20th
day of January so if there is no
election then by default the president
term ends on January 20th one way or
another he's out of the White House this
doesn't depend on president Trump's
willingness to vacate the White House
legally he is no longer the president
and I suspect if he stayed there there
would be some big men with green
uniforms and big pointy guns that would
remove him from the White House unless
they give me an extension for the
president but if President Trump isn't
the president then who is let's play
this scenario out just a little bit
further because we've established that
President Trump is no longer the
president come January 20th 2021 but
that still begs the question who is now
I'll tell you who would become president
but first I want to tell you who should
become president that's Jose Andres Jose
Andreas is basically the patron saint of
DC these days the world-famous chef
created something called the world
central kitchen to feed those in need
during natural and man-made disasters
they were on the ground in Puerto Rico
for Hurricane Maria and they're out in
the streets helping people during this
pandemic
they've already served over 15 million
meals I just gave $500 and it would mean
the world to me that if you're in a
position to give if you could give a
little bit as well the link to the
website is in the description every
little bit helps and it would be great
if we could come together and help
people during this corona virus pandemic
but the question is who would become
president in this crazy situation where
there was no election under normal
circumstances the Constitution and the
federal statutes provide an order of
succession for who would take over the
powers and duties of the office of
President in the event to the current
president is incapacitated dies resigns
or is removed from office or in this
case his term has effectively ended and
you may recall under this line of
succession which we have covered a
couple times on this channel under
article 2 of the Constitution after the
president it goes to the vice president
and then it proceeds next to the Speaker
of the House the president pro tempore
of the Senate and so forth under the
presidential succession act now first
things first we can eliminate some of
these options because under this
hypothetical there hasn't been an
election and so just as the president's
term expires on January 20th so too does
the vice president's term expire so the
vice president can't pick up the mantle
for the president who's
term has expired on the same day and
then next we can't necessarily give the
presidency to the Speaker of the House
because remember members of Congress are
reelected every two years so every time
there's a presidential election all of
the Congress people are also reelected
so if there is no general election then
there aren't going to be any members of
Congress in the House of Representatives
there might be some people in the Senate
because they're elected on a six-year
staggered basis but there would be no
members of Congress for the most part so
this creates a bunch of really really
weird constitutional scenarios but we
know a couple things for certain number
one we know that the president's term
expires so that president can't remain
president number two vice president's
term has also expired we know that there
aren't any members of Congress
presumably at least in the first
instance so there's no speaker of the
house so that leaves a couple of really
weird scenarios number one is that if
these state legislators or the state
governor's got together and just simply
agreed to reappoint all of the members
of Congress then then you have a sitting
body in the House of Representatives if
that's the case then president Trump
would have to swallow hard when he finds
out that that means his arch enemy
Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi would
now be filling his shoes as the third in
the line of succession now the other
option would be that those in Congress
whose term was set to expire would not
be reappointed which would completely
abolish the House of Representatives at
least in the short term since they're
all voted on every two years and at that
point what we have is two-thirds of the
Senators left since two-thirds of the
Senators weren't up for re-election but
one-third were up for re-election so in
this scenario we have no president no
vice-president no speaker the house and
no members of the House of
Representatives what that means then is
we would go to the fourth person in the
line of succession which would be the
president pro tempore of the Senate as
the acting present because they're next
in line for a succession now you can be
forgiven if you have forgotten your high
school civics the president pro tempore
of the Senate is generally the oldest
serving member of the majority party in
this
and in this case that would be Senator
Chuck Grassley the Republican senator
who is 85 years young from the great
state of Iowa who is currently the
president pro tempore of the Senate so
does that answer the question president
Chuck Grassley well probably not because
remember I said that one third of the
senators are actually up for re-election
in this election cycle so I don't think
that the state governors are just going
to sit idly by they would probably
appoint interim senators to fill the the
gaps left by the senators who who were
up for reelection and so then you have
to look at how many of the vacancies
would be filled by Republican governors
and how many vacancies would be filled
by Democratic senators and thankfully
the math has already been done by Andrew
at opening arguments who figured out
that there are more Democratic governors
who would fill vacancies than Republican
governors who would fill vacancies so at
the end of the day of the senators who
are up for re-election and are being
reappointed that probably means that
there would be a Democratic majority in
the Senate which means that the
president pro tempore would be nominated
by the Democrats and the senior most
democratic senator in the Senate is none
other than Vermont senator Pat Leahy so
we can all welcome President Pat Leahy
to the office so there you go in the
wildest of twists the most likely
outcomes if President Trump were to
somehow cancel the election is either
President Nancy Pelosi or President Pat
Leahy I don't really know how to feel
about either of those two scenarios but
after all of these crazy hypotheticals
and rabbit holes that we've gone through
I'll say one more thing to ease
everyone's mind there is no plausible
way in which the president could cancel
or even postpone the election and remain
president we have held presidential
elections in multiple world wars in
civil wars and past pandemics and even
when the White House was burned to the
ground by the British as we've done in
the past we will elect our next
president the good old-fashioned way
we will not have to deal with a
president Pelosi or president Leahy now
if you're waiting to see what happens to
our democracy and our economy and you
want to do some good for this world I'd
recommend Tam for a cause which lets you
raise money for charity just by opening
new tabs in the browser window which
we're gonna do anyway tamper cos is a
Google Chrome extension that allows you
to pick the charity of your choice and
then every time you open up a new tab
instead of a blank page it displays a
beautiful new customizable tab with a
couple of tiny ads and the money that
you generate is then donated to your
charity you can see in real time how
much money is being generated and it's
gamified so that every time you open up
a new tab you create a heart which then
you can specifically donate to the
charity of your choice
tab free cause has partnered with
several kovat 19 specific charities as
well so you can fight the effects of the
corona virus directly and the best part
is the gorgeous new tab is really
helpful too you can customize it with
graphics I like to see pictures of the
outdoors to remember what that actually
looks like you can create bookmarks
create to-do lists and write yourself
notes which I find really really helpful
when I open a new tab all you have to do
is click on the link in the description
and install the Chrome extension and
that works automatically tap free caused
users like you have raised hundreds of
thousands of dollars for charity it's
the easiest possible way to give to
charity and you could even just sit
there and just open up a bunch of tabs
for fun so just click on the link in the
description and download the extension
and do some good by doing what you were
gonna do anyway so do you agree with my
analysis leave your objections in the
comments and click on this playlist over
here with all of my other analysis about
all the legal issues surrounding Co vid
19 and just click on this playlist and
I'll see you in court